SKIN IN THE GAME
5/28/16 © Copyright 2015 by N. N. Taleb. This is a preliminary draft.
29

The Most Intolerant Wins: The
Dominance of the Stubborn Minority
Why you don’t have to smoke in the smoking section — Your food choices on the
fall of the Saudi king –How to prevent a friend from working too hard –Omar
Sharif ‘s conversion — How to make a market collapse
The best example I know that gives insights into the functioning of a complex
system is with the following situation. It suffices for an intransigent minority –
a certain type of intransigent minorities –to reach a minutely small level, say
three or four percent of the total population, for the entire population to have to
submit to their preferences. Further, an optical illusion comes with the
dominance of the minority: a naive observer would be under the impression that
the choices and preferences are those of the majority. If it seems absurd, it is
because our scientific intuitions aren’t calibrated for that (fughedabout scientific
and academic intuitions and snap judgments; they don’t work and your standard
intellectualization fails with complex systems, though not your grandmothers’
wisdom).
 The main idea behind complex systems is that the ensemble behaves in way
not predicted by the components. The interactions matter more than the nature
of the units. Studying individual ants will never (one can safely say never for
most such situations), never give us an idea on how the ant colony operates. For
that, one needs to understand an ant colony as an ant colony, no less, no more,
not a collection of ants. This is called an “emergent” property of the whole, by
which parts and whole differ because what matters is the interactions between
such parts. And interactions can obey very simple rules. The rule we discuss in
this chapter is the minority rule.
 The minority rule will show us how it all it takes is a small number of
intolerant virtuous people with skin in the game, in the form of courage, for
society to function properly.
 This example of complexity hit me, ironically, as I was attending the New
England Complex Systems institute summer barbecue. As the hosts were setting
up the table and unpacking the drinks, a friend who was observant and only ate
Kosher dropped by to say hello. I offered him a glass of that type of yellow
sugared water with citric acid people sometimes call lemonade, almost certain
that he would reject it owing to his dietary laws. He didn’t. He drank the liquid 
called lemonade, and another Kosher person commented: “liquids around here
are Kosher”. We looked at the carton container. There was a fine print: a tiny
symbol, a U inside a circle, indicating that it was Kosher. The symbol will be
detected by those who need to know and look for the minuscule print. As to
others, like myself, I had been speaking prose all these years without knowing,
drinking Kosher liquids without knowing they were Kosher liquids.


Figure 3 The lemonade container with the circled U indicating it is (literally)
Kosher.
CRIMINALS WITH PEANUT ALLERGIES
A strange idea hit me. The Kosher population represents less than three tenth of
a percent of the residents of the United States. Yet, it appears that almost all
drinks are Kosher. Why? Simply because going full Kosher allows the producer,
grocer, restaurant, to not have to distinguish between Kosher and nonkosher for
liquids, with special markers, separate aisles, separate inventories, different
stocking sub-facilities. And the simple rule that changes the total is as follows:
A Kosher (or halal) eater will never eat nonkosher (or nonhalal) food ,
but a nonkosher eater isn’t banned from eating kosher.
Or, rephrased in another domain:
A disabled person will not use the regular bathroom but a nondisabled
person will use the bathroom for disabled people.
Granted, sometimes, in practice, we hesitate to use the bathroom with the
disabled sign on it owing to some confusion –mistaking the rule for the one for
parking cars, under the belief that the bathroom is reserved for exclusive use by
the handicapped.
Someone with a peanut allergy will not eat products that touch
peanuts but a person without such allergy can eat items without
peanut traces in them.
Which explains why it is so hard to find peanuts on airplanes and why schools
are peanut-free (which, in a way, increases the number of persons with peanut
allergies as reduced exposure is one of the causes behind such allergies).
 Let us apply the rule to domains where it can get entertaining:
An honest person will never commit criminal acts but a criminal will
readily engage in legal acts.
 Let us call such minority an intransigent group, and the majority a flexible
one. And the rule is an asymmetry in choices.
 I once pulled a prank on a friend. Years ago when Big Tobacco were hiding
and repressing the evidence of harm from secondary smoking, New York had
smoking and nonsmoking sections in restaurants (even airplanes had, absurdly,
a smoking section). I once went to lunch with a friend visiting from Europe: the
restaurant only had availability in the smoking sections. I convinced the friend
that we needed to buy cigarettes as we had to smoke in the smoking section. He
complied.
 Two more things. First, the geography of the terrain, that is, the spatial
structure, matters a bit; it makes a big difference whether the intransigents are
in their own district or are mixed with the rest of the population. If the people
following the minority rule lived in Ghettos, with their separate small economy,
then the minority rule would not apply. But, when a population has an even
spatial distribution, say the ratio of such a minority in a neighborhood is the
same as that in the village, that in the village is the same as in the county, that in
the county is the same as that in state, and that in the sate is the same as
nationwide, then the (flexible) majority will have to submit to the minority rule.
Second, the cost structure matters quite a bit. It happens in our first example
that making lemonade compliant with Kosher laws doesn’t change the price by
much, not enough to justify inventories. But if the manufacturing of Kosher
lemonade cost substantially more, then the rule will be weakened in some 
SKIN IN THE GAME
5/28/16 © Copyright 2015 by N. N. Taleb. This is a preliminary draft.
31
nonlinear proportion to the difference in costs. If it cost ten times as much to
make Kosher food, then the minority rule will not apply, except perhaps in some
very rich neighborhoods.
 Muslims have Kosher laws so to speak, but these are much narrower and apply
only to meat. For Muslim and Jews have near-identical slaughter rules (all
Kosher is halal for most Sunni Muslims, or was so in past centuries, but the
reverse is not true). Note that these slaughter rules are skin-in-the-game driven,
inherited from the ancient Eastern Mediterranean [discussed in Chapter] Greek
and Semitic practice to only worship the gods if one has skin in the game,
sacrifice meat to the divinity, and eat what’s left. The Gods do not like cheap
signaling.
 Now consider this manifestation of the dictatorship of the minority. In the
United Kingdom, where the (practicing) Muslim population is only three to four
percent, a very high number of the meat we find is halal. Close to seventy
percent of lamb imports from New Zealand are halal. Close to ten percent of the
chain Subway carry halal-only stores (meaning no pork), in spite of the high
costs from the loss of business of nonpork stores. The same holds in South Africa
where, with the same proportion of Muslims, a disproportionately higher
number of chicken is Halal certified. But in the U.K. and other Christian
countries, halal is not neutral enough to reach a high level, as people may use
other people’s religious norms. For instance, the 7th Century Christian Arab poet
Al-Akhtal made a point to never eat halal meat, in his famous defiant poem
boasting his Christianity: “I do not eat sacrificial flesh”
One can expect the same rejection of religious norms to take place in the West as
the Muslim populations in Europe grows.
Figure 4 Renormalization group: steps one through three (start from the top):
Four boxes containing four boxes, with one of the boxes pink at step one, with
successive applications of the minority rule.

 So the minority rule may produce a larger share of halal food in the stores than
warranted by the proportion of halal eaters in the population, but with a
headwind somewhere because some people may have a taboo against Moslem
food. But with some non-religious Kashrut rules, so to speak, the share can be
expected converge to closer to a hundred percent (or some high number). In the
U.S. and Europe, “organic” food companies are selling more and more products
precisely because of the minority rule and because ordinary and unlabeled food
may be seen by some to contain pesticides, herbicides, and transgenic
genetically modified organisms, “GMOs” with, according to them, unknown
risks. (What we call GMOs in this context means transgenic food, entailing the
transfer of genes from a foreign organism or species). Or it could be for some 
existential reasons, cautious behavior, or Burkean conservatism –some may not
want to venture too far too fast from what their grandparents ate. Labeling
something “organic” is a way to say that it contains no transgenic GMOs.
 In promoting genetically modified food via all manner of lobbying, purchasing
of congressmen, and overt scientific propaganda (with smear campaigns against
such persons as yours truly), the big agricultural companies foolishly believed
that all they needed was to win the majority. No, you idiots. As I said, your snap
“scientific” judgment is too naive in these type of decisions. Consider that
transgenic-GMO eaters will eat nonGMOs, but not the reverse. So it may suffice
to have a tiny, say no more than five percent of evenly spatially distributed
population of non-genetically modified eaters for the entire population to have
to eat non-GMO food. How? Say you have a corporate event, a wedding, or a
lavish party to celebrate the fall of the Saudi Arabian regime, the bankruptcy of
the rent-seeking investment bank Goldman Sachs, or the public reviling of Ray
Kotcher, chairman of Ketchum the public relation firm that smears scientists
and scientific whistleblowers on behalf of big corporations. Do you need to send
a questionnaire asking people if they eat or don’t eat transgenic GMOs and
reserve special meals accordingly? No. You just select everything non-GMO,
provided the price difference is not consequential. And the price difference
appears to be small enough to be negligible as (perishable) food costs in America
are largely, about up to eighty or ninety percent, determined by distribution and
storage, not the cost at the agricultural level. And as organic food (and
designations such as “natural”) is in higher demand, from the minority rule,
distribution costs decrease and the minority rule ends up accelerating in its
effect.
 Big Ag (the large agricultural firms) did not realize that this is the equivalent of
entering a game in which one needed to not just win more points than the
adversary, but win ninety-seven percent of the total points just to be safe. It is
strange, once again, to see Big Ag who spent hundreds of millions of dollars on
research cum smear campaigns, with hundreds of these scientists who think of
themselves as more intelligent than the rest of the population, miss such an
elementary point about asymmetric choices.
 Another example: do not think that the spread of automatic shifting cars is
necessarily due to the majority of drivers initially preferring automatic; it can
just be because those who can drive manual shifts can always drive automatic,
but the reciprocal is not true 21.

21 Thank Amir-Reza Amini.
 The method of analysis employed here is called renormalization group, a
powerful apparatus in mathematical physics that allows us to see how things
scale up (or down). Let us examine it next –without mathematics.
RENORMALIZATION GROUP
Figure 2 shows four boxes exhibiting what is called fractal self-similarity. Each
box contains four smaller boxes. Each one of the four boxes will contain four
boxes, and so all the way down, and all the way up until we reach a certain level.
There are two colors: yellow for the majority choice, and pink for the minority
one.
 Assume the smaller unit contains four people, a family of four. One of them is
in the intransigent minority and eats only nonGMO food (which includes
organic). The color of the box is pink and the others yellow . We “renormalize
once” as we move up: the stubborn daughter manages to impose her rule on the
four and the unit is now all pink, i.e. will opt for nonGMO. Now, step three, you
have the family going to a barbecue party attended by three other families. As
they are known to only eat nonGMO, the guests will cook only organic. The local
grocery store realizing the neighborhood is only nonGMO switches to nonGMO
to simplify life, which impacts the local wholesaler, and the stories continues
and “renormalizes”.
 By some coincidence, the day before the Boston barbecue, I was flaneuring in
New York, and I dropped by the office of a friend I wanted to prevent from
working, that is, engage in an activity that when abused, causes the loss of
mental clarity, in addition to bad posture and loss of definition in the facial
features. The French physicist Serge Galam happened to be visiting and chose
the friend’s office to kill time. Galam was first to apply these renormalization
techniques to social matters and political science; his name was familiar as he is
the author of the main book on the subject, which had then been sitting for
months in an unopened Amazon box in my basement. He introduced me to his
research and showed me a computer model of elections by which it suffices that
some minority exceeds a certain level for its choices to prevail.
 So the same illusion exists in political discussions, spread by the political
“scientists”: you think that because some extreme right or left wing party has,
say, the support of ten percent of the population that their candidate would get
ten percent of the votes. No: these baseline voters should be classified as
“inflexible” and will always vote for their faction. But some of the flexible voters
can also vote for that extreme faction, just as nonKosher people can eat Kosher,
and these people are the ones to watch out for as they may swell the numbers of
votes for the extreme party. Galam’s models produced a bevy of counterintuitive 
SKIN IN THE GAME
5/28/16 © Copyright 2015 by N. N. Taleb. This is a preliminary draft.
33
effects in political science –and his predictions turned out to be way closer to
real outcomes than the naive consensus.
THE VETO
The fact we saw from the renormalization group the “veto” effect as a person in a
group can steer choices. Rory Sutherland suggested that this explains why some
fast-food chains, such as McDonald thrive, not because they offer a great
product, but because they are not vetoed in a certain socio-economic group –and
by a small proportions of people in that group at that. To put it in technical
terms, it was a best worse-case divergence from expectations: a lower variance
and lower mean.
 When there are few choices, McDonald’s appears to be a safe bet. It is also a
safe bet in shady places with few regulars where the food variance from
expectation can be consequential –I am writing these lines in Milan train station
and it as offensive as it can be to a visitor from far away, McDonald’s is one of
the few restaurants there. Shockingly, one sees Italians there seeking refuge
from a risky meal.
 Pizza is the same story: it is commonly accepted food and outside a fancy party
nobody will be blamed for ordering it.
 Rory wrote to me about the asymmetry beer-wine and the choices made for
parties: “Once you have ten percent or more women at a party, you cannot serve
only beer. But most men will drink wine. So you only need one set of glasses if
you serve only wine - the universal donor, to use the language of blood groups.”
LINGUA FRANCA
If a meeting is taking place in Germany in the Teutonic-looking conference room
of a corporation that is sufficiently international or European, and one of the
persons in the room doesn’t speak German, the entire meeting will be run in...
English, the brand of inelegant English used in corporations across the world.
That way they can equally offend their Teuronic ancestors and the English
language22. It all started with the asymmetric rule that those who are nonnative
in English know (bad) English, but the reverse (English speakers knowing other
languages) is less likely. French was supposed to be the language of diplomacy as
civil servants coming from aristocratic background used it –while their more
vulgar compatriots involved in commerce relied on English. In the rivalry

22 Thank Arnie Schwarzvogel.
between the two languages, English won as commerce grew to dominate
modern life; the victory it has nothing to do with the prestige of France or the
efforts of their civil servants in promoting their more or less beautiful Latinized
and logically spelled language over the orthographically confusing one of transChannel
meat-pie eaters.
 We can thus get some intuition on how the emergence of lingua franca
languages can come from minority rules–and that is a point that is not visible to
linguists. Aramaic is a Semitic language which succeeded Canaanite (that is,
Phoenician-Hebrew) in the Levant and resembles Arabic; it was the language
Jesus Christ spoke. The reason it came to dominate the Levant and Egypt isn’t
because of any particular imperial Semitic power or the fact that they have
interesting noses. It was the Persians –who speak an Indo-European language –
who spread Aramaic, the language of Assyria, Syria, and Babylon. Persians
taught Egyptians a language that was not their own. Simply, when the Persians
invaded Babylon they found an administration with scribes who could only use
Aramaic and didn’t know Persian, so Aramaic became the state language. If your
secretary can only take dictation in Aramaic, Aramaic is what you will use. This
led to the oddity of Aramaic being used in Mongolia, as records were maintained
in the Syriac alphabet (Syriac is the Eastern dialect of Aramaic). And centuries
later, the story would repeat itself in reverse, with the Arabs using Greek in their
early administration in the seventh and eighth’s centuries. For during the
Hellenistic era, Greek replaced Aramaic as the lingua franca in the Levant, and
the scribes of Damascus maintained their records in Greek. But it was not the
Greeks who spread Greek around the Mediterranean –Alexander (himself not
Greek but Macedonian and spoke Greek as second language, don’t discuss this
with a Greek as it infuriates them) did not lead to an immediate deep cultural
Hellenization. It was the Romans who accelerated the spreading of Greek, as
they used it in their administration across the Eastern empire.
 A French Canadian friend from Montreal, Jean-Louis Rheault, commented as
follows, bemoaning the loss of language of French Canadians outside narrowly
provincial areas. He said: “In Canada, when we say bilingual, it is English
speaking and when we say “French speaking” it becomes bilingual.”
THE ONE-WAY STREET OF RELIGIONS
In the same manner, the spread of Islam in the Near East where Christianity was
heavily entrenched (it was born there) can be attributed to two simple
asymmetries. The original Islamic rulers weren’t particularly interested in
converting Christians as these provided them with tax revenues –the
proselytism of Islam did not address those called “people of the book”, i.e. 
individuals of Abrahamic faith. In fact, my ancestors who survived thirteen
centuries under Muslim rule saw advantages in not being Muslim: mostly in the
avoidance of military conscription.
 The two asymmetric rules were are as follows. First, if a non Muslim man
under the rule of Islam marries a Muslim woman, he needs to convert to Islam –
and if either parents of a child happens to be Muslim, the child will be Muslim23.
Second, becoming Muslim is irreversible, as apostasy is the heaviest crime under
the religion, sanctioned by the death penalty. The famous Egyptian actor Omar
Sharif, born Mikhael Demetri Shalhoub, was of Lebanese Christian origins. He
converted to Islam to marry a famous Egyptian actress and had to change his
name to an Arabic one. He later divorced, but did not revert to the faith of his
ancestors.
 Under these two asymmetric rules, one can do simple simulations and see how
a small Islamic group occupying Christian (Coptic) Egypt can lead, over the
centuries, to the Copts becoming a tiny minority. All one needs is a small rate of
interfaith marriages. Likewise, one can see how Judaism doesn’t spread and
tends to stay in the minority, as the religion has opposite rules: the mother is
required to be Jewish, causing interfaith marriages to leave the community. An
even stronger asymmetry than that of Judaism explains the depletion in the
Near East of three Gnostic faiths: the Druze, the Ezidi, and the Mandeans
(Gnostic religions are those with mysteries and knowledge that is typically
accessible to only a minority of elders, with the rest of the members in the dark
about the details of the faith). Unlike Islam that requires either parents to be
Muslim, and Judaism that asks for at least the mother to have the faith, these
three religions require both parents to be of the faith, otherwise the person says
toodaloo to the community.
 Egypt has a flat terrain. The distribution of the population presents
homogeneous mixtures there, which permits renormalization (i.e. allows the
asymmetric rule to prevail) –we saw earlier in the chapter that for Kosher rules
to work, one needed Jews to be somewhat spread out across the country. But in
places such as Lebanon, Galilee, and Northern Syria, with mountainous terrain,
Christians and other Non Sunni Muslims remained concentrated. Christians not
being exposed to Muslims, experienced no intermarriage.
 Egypt’s Copts suffered from another problem: the irreversibility of Islamic
conversions. Many Copts during Islamic rule converted to Islam when it was
merely an administrative procedure, something that helps one land a job or

23 Note some minor variations across regions and Islamic sects. The original rule is
that if a Muslim woman marries a Non Muslim man, he needs to convert. In practice, in
many countries, both need to do so.
handle a problem that requires Islamic jurisprudence. One do not have to really
believe in it since Islam doesn’t conflict markedly with Orthodox Christianity.
Little by little a Christian or Jewish family bearing the marrano-style conversion
becomes truly converted, as, a couple of generations later, the descendants
forget the arrangement of their ancestors.
 So all Islam did was out-stubborn Christianity, which itself won thanks to its
own stubbornness. For, before Islam, the original spread of Christianity in the
Roman empire can be largely seen due to... the blinding intolerance of
Christians, their unconditional, aggressive and proselyting recalcitrance.
Roman pagans were initially tolerant of Christians, as the tradition was to share
gods with other members of the empire. But they wondered why these
Nazarenes didn’t want to give and take gods and offer that Jesus fellow to the
Roman pantheon in exchange for some other gods. What, our gods aren’t good
enough for them? But Christians were intolerant of Roman paganism. The
“persecutions” of the Christians had vastly more to do with the intolerance of the
Christians for the pantheon and local gods, than the reverse. What we read is
history written by the Christian side, not the Greco-Roman one.
 We know too little about the Roman side during the rise of Christianity, as
hagiographies have dominated the discourse: we have for instance the narrative
of the martyr Saint Catherine, who kept converting her jailors until she was
beheaded, except that... she may have never existed. There are endless histories
of Christian martyrs and saints –but very little about the other side, Pagan
heroes. All we have is the bit we know about the reversion to Christianity during
the emperor Julian’s apostasy and the writings of his entourage of Syrian-Greek
pagans such as Libanius Antiochus. Julian had tried to go back to Ancient
Paganism in vain: it was like trying to keep a balloon under water. And it was not
because the majority was pagan as historians mistakenly think: it was because
the Christian side was too unyielding. Christianity had great minds such as
Gregorius of Nazianzen and Basil of Caesaria, but nothing to match the great
orator Libanius, not even close. (My heuristic is that the more pagan, the more
brilliant one’s mind, and the higher one’s ability to handle nuances and
ambiguity. Purely monotheistic religious such as Protestant Christianity, Salafi
Islam, or fundamentalist atheism accommodate literalist and mediocre minds
that cannot handle ambiguity.)
 In fact we can observe in the history of Mediterranean “religions” or, rather,
rituals and systems of behavior and belief, a drift dictated by the intolerant,
actually bringing the system closer to what we can call a religion. Judaism might
have almost lost because of the mother-rule and the confinement to a tribal
base, but Christianity ruled, and for the very same reasons, Islam did. Islam?
there have been many Islams, the final accretion quite different from the earlier 
SKIN IN THE GAME
5/28/16 © Copyright 2015 by N. N. Taleb. This is a preliminary draft.
35
ones. For Islam itself is ending up being taken over (in the Sunni branch) by the
purists simply because these were more intolerant than the rest: the Wahhabis,
founders of Saudi Arabia, were the ones who destroyed the shrines, and to
impose the maximally intolerant rule, in a manner that was later imitated by
“ISIS” (the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria/the Levant). Every single accretion of
Sunni Islam seems to be there to accommodate the most intolerant of its
branches.
IMPOSING VIRTUE ON OTHERS
This idea of one-sidedness can help us debunk a few more misconceptions. How
do books get banned? Certainly not because they offend the average person –
most persons are passive and don’t really care, or don’t care enough to request
the banning. It looks like, from past episodes, that all it takes is a few
(motivated) activists for the banning of some books, or the black-listing of some
people. The great philosopher and logician Bertrand Russell lost his job at the
City University of New York owing to a letter by an angry –and stubborn –
mother who did not wish to have her daughter in the same room as the fellow
with dissolute lifestyle and unruly ideas. 24
 The same seems to apply to prohibitions –at least the prohibition of alcohol in
the United States which led to interesting Mafia stories.
 Let us conjecture that the formation of moral values in society doesn’t come
from the evolution of the consensus. No, it is the most intolerant person who
imposes virtue on others precisely because of that intolerance. The same can
apply to civil rights.
 An insight as to how the mechanisms of religion and transmission of morals
obey the same renormalization dynamics as dietary laws –and how we can show
that morality is more likely to be something enforced by a minority. We saw
earlier in the chapter the asymmetry between obeying and breaking rules: a lawabiding
(or rule abiding) fellow always follows the rules, but a felon or someone
with looser sets of principles will not always break the rules. Likewise we
discussed the strong asymmetric effects of the halal dietary laws. Let us merge
the two. It turns out that, in classical Arabic, the term halal has one opposite:
haram. Violating legal and moral rules –any rule— is called haram. It is the
exact same interdict that governs food intake and all other human behaviors,
like sleeping with the wife of the neighbor, lending with interest (without

24 “Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful citizens can change the world.
Indeed, it is the only thing that ever has.” - Margaret Mead
partaking of downside of the borrower) or killing one’s landlord for
pleasure. Haram is haram and is asymmetric.
 From that we can see that once a moral rule is established, it would suffice to
have a small intransigent minority of geographically distributed followers to
dictate the norm in society. The sad news, as we will see in the next chapter, is
that one person looking at mankind as an aggregate may mistakenly believe that
humans are spontaneously becoming more moral, better, more gentle, have
better breath, when it applies to only a small proportion of mankind.
POPPER’S PARADOX
As I am writing these lines, people are disputing whether the freedom of the
enlightened West can be undermined by the intrusive policies that would be
needed to fight Salafi fundamentalists.
 Clearly can democracy –by definition the majority – tolerate enemies? The
question is as follows: " Would you agree to deny the freedom of speech to every
political party that has in its charter the banning the freedom of speech?" Let’s
go one step further, "Should a society that has elected to be tolerant be
intolerant about intolerance?”
 This is in fact the incoherence that Kurt Gödel (the grandmaster of logical
rigor) detected in the constitution while taking the naturalization exam. Legend
has it that Gödel started arguing with the judge and Einstein, who was his
witness during the process, saved him.
 I wrote about people with logical flaws asking me if one should be "skeptical
about skepticism"; I used a similar answer as Popper when was asked if " one
could falsify falsification".
 We can answer these points using the minority rule. Yes, an intolerant minority
can control and destroy democracy. Actually, as we saw, it will eventually
destroy our world.
So, we need to be more than intolerant with some intolerant minorities. It is not
permissible to use “American values” or “Western principles” in treating
intolerant Salafism (which denies other peoples’ right to have their own
religion). The West is currently in the process of committing suicide.
THE IRREVERENCE OF MARKETS AND SCIENCE
Now consider markets. We can say that markets aren’t the sum of market
participants, but price changes reflect the activities of the most motivated buyer 
and seller. Yes, the most motivated rules. Indeed this is something that only
traders seem to understand: why a price can drop by ten percent because of a
single seller. All you need is a stubborn seller. Markets react in a way that is
disproportional to the impetus. The overall stock markets represent currently
more than thirty trillions dollars but a single order in 2008, only fifty billion,
that is less than two tenth of a percent of the total, caused them to drop by close
to ten percent, causing losses of around three trillion. It was an order activated
by the Parisian Bank Société Générale who discovered a hidden acquisition by a
rogue trader and wanted to reverse the purchase. Why did the market react so
disproportionately? Because the order was one-way –stubborn— there was
desire to sell but no way to change one’s mind. My personal adage is:
The market is like a large movie theatre with a small door.
 And the best way to detect a sucker (say the usual finance journalist) is to see if
his focus is on the size of the door or on that of the theater. Stampedes happen in
cinemas, say when someone shouts “fire”, because those who want to be out do
not want to stay in, exactly the same unconditionality we saw with Kosher
observance.
 Science acts similarly. We will return later with a discussion of how the
minority rule is behind Karl Popper’s approach to science. But let us for now
discuss the more entertaining Feynman. What do You Care What Other People
Think? is the title of a book of anecdotes by the great Richard Feynman, the
most irreverent and playful scientist of his day. As reflected in the title of the
book, Feynman conveys in it the idea of the fundamental irreverence of science,
acting through a similar mechanism as the Kosher asymmetry. How? Science
isn’t the sum of what scientists think, but exactly as with markets, a procedure
that is highly skewed. Once you debunk something, it is now wrong (that is how
science operates but let’s ignore disciplines such as economics and political
science that are more like pompous entertainment). Had science operated by
majority consensus we would be still stuck in the Middle Ages and Einstein
would have ended as he started, a patent clerk with fruitless side hobbies.
***
Alexander said that it was preferable to have an army of sheep led by a lion to an
army of lions led by a sheep. Alexander (or no doubt he who produced this
probably apocryphal saying) understood the value of the active, intolerant, and
courageous minority. Hannibal terrorized Rome for a decade and a half with a
tiny army of mercenaries, winning twenty-two battles against the Romans,
battles in which he was outnumbered each time. He was inspired by a version of
this maxim. At the battle of Cannae, he remarked to Gisco who complained that
the Carthaginians were outnumbered by the Romans: “There is one thing that’s
more wonderful than their numbers … in all that vast number there is not one
man called Gisgo.25”vi
 Unus sed leo: only one but a lion.
 This large payoff from stubborn courage is not just in the military. The entire
growth of society, whether economic or moral, comes from a small number of
people. So we close this chapter with a remark about the role of skin in the game
in the condition of society. Society doesn’t evolve by consensus, voting, majority,
committees, verbose meeting, academic conferences, and polling; only a few
people suffice to disproportionately move the needle. All one needs is an
asymmetric rule somewhere. And asymmetry is present in about everything.

25 The Carthaginians seem to be short in name variety: there are plenty of Hamilcars
and Hadsrupals confusing historians. Likewise there appear to be many Giscos, including
the character in Flaubert’s Salambo. 
SKIN IN THE GAME
5/28/16 © Copyright 2015 by N. N. Taleb. This is a preliminary draft.
37
On Things that Do Not Average or the Mean
Field Problem
–Not the same way – A liter a day – C elegans deserves its name –the selfish
Richard Dawkins
Let us take the idea of the last chapter [the intransigent minority’s
disproportional influence] one step further, get a bit more technical, and
generalize. It will debunk some of the fallacies we hear in psychology,
“evolutionary theory”, game theory, behavioral economics, neuroscience, and
similar fields not subjected to proper logical (and mathematical) rigor, in spite of
the occasional complicated equations.
 Consider the following as a rule. Whenever you have nonlinearity, the average
doesn’t matter anymore. Hence:
The more nonlinearity in the response, the less informational the
average.
 For instance, your benefit from drinking water would be linear if ten glasses of
water were ten times as good as one single glass. If that is not the case, then
necessarily the average water consumption matters less than something else
that we will call “unevenness”, or volatility, or inequality in consumption. Say
your average daily consumption needs to be one liter a day and I gave you ten
liters one day and none for the remaining nine days, for an average of one liter a
day. Odds are you won’t survive. You want your quantity of water to be as evenly
distributed as possible. Within the day, you do not need to consume the same
amount water every minute, but at the scale of the day, you want maximal
evenness.
 The effect of the nonlinearity in the response on the average –and the
informational value of such an average –is something I’ve explained in some
depth in Antifragile, so I will just assume a summary here is sufficient. From an
informational standpoint, someone who tells you “I drank 0ne liter of water liter
day on average” is not conveying much information at all; there needs to be a
second dimension, the variations around such an average.
 Note that an average and a sum are mathematically the same thing up to a
simple division by a constant, so the fallacy of the average translate into the
fallacy of summing, or aggregating, or looking at collective that has many
components from the properties of a single unit.
****
As we saw, complex systems are characterized by the interactions between their
components, and the resulting properties of the ensemble not seen from the
parts.
 There is a rich apparatus to study interactions originating from what is called
the Ising problem, after the physicist Ernst Ising, originally in the ferromagnetic
domain, but that has been adapted to many other areas. The model consists of
discrete variables that represent atoms that can be in one of two states called
“spins” but are in fact representing whether the state is what is nicknamed “up”
or “down” (or can be dealt with using +1 or −1). The atoms are arranged in a
lattice, allowing each unit to interact with its neighbors. In low dimensions, that
is that for every atom you look at an interaction on a line (one dimensional)
between two neighbors one to its left and one to its right, on a grid (two
dimensional), the Ising model is simple and lend itself to simple solutions. But
when we move to higher dimensions things get rapidly complicated. Just
imagine the acceleration: if you have forty dimensions you end up having a
billion possible combinations of interactions in a single neighborhood. [Add a
bit more here. Because of LLN higher dimensions average better than lower
ones.]
 One method in such situations called “mean field” is to generalize from the
average interaction and apply to the ensemble. This is possible if and only if
there is no dependence between one interaction and another –the procedure
appears to be the opposite of renormalization from the last chapter. And, of
course, this type of averaging is not possible if there are nonlinearities in the
effect of the interactions.
 More generally, the Übererror is to apply the “mean field” technique, by
looking at the average and applying a function to it, instead of averaging the
functions –a violation of Jensen’s inequality. Distortions from mean field
techniques will necessarily occur in the presence of nonlinearities. But
dimensionality compounds the effect of nonlinearity: something may seem fine
in low dimensions, then explode in higher ones.
 What I am saying may appear to be complicated here –but it was not so with
the story of the average water consumption. So let us produce equivalent
simplifications across things that do not average.
 From the last chapter,
The average dietary preferences of the population will not allow us to
understand the dietary preferences of the whole.
or
The average behavior of the market participant will not allow us to
understand the general behavior of the market.
These points appear clear thanks to our discussion about renormalization. They
may cancel some stuff you know. But to show how under complexity the entire
field of social science may fall apart, take one step further,
The psychological experiments on individuals showing “biases” do not
allow us to understand aggregates or collective behavior, nor do they
enlighten us on the behavior of groups.
Human nature is not defined outside of transactions involving other humans.
Remember that we do not live alone, but in packs and almost nothing of
relevance concerns a person in isolation –which is what is typically done in
laboratory-style work.
 What I just said explains the failure of the so-called field of behavioral
economics to give us any more information than orthodox economics (itself
rather poor) on how to play the market or understand the economy, or generate
policy.
 But, going further, there is this thing called, or as Fat Tony would say, this ting
called game theory that hasn’t done much for us other than produce loads of BS.
Why?
The average interaction as studied in game theory insofar as it
reveals individual behavior does not allow us to generalize across
preferences and behavior of groups.
[Explain with maximal simplicity how the ultimatum game between two
individuals fails under renormalization... ]
 And it is a fact that groups are units on their own. There are qualitative
differences between a group of ten and a group of, say 395,435. Each is a
different animal, in the literal sense, as different as a book is from an office
building. When we focus on commonalities, we get confused, but, at a certain
scale, things become different. Mathematically different. The higher the
dimension, in other words the number of possible interactions, the more
difficult to understand the macro from the micro, the general from the units.
 Or, in spite of the huge excitement about our ability to see into the brain using
the so-called field of neuroscience:
Understanding how the subparts of the brain (say, neurons) work will
never allow us to understand how the brain works.
So far we have no f***g idea how the brain of the worm C elegans works, which
has around three hundred neurons. C elegans was the first living unit to have its
gene sequenced. Now consider that the human brain has about one hundred
billion neurons. and that going from 300 to 301 neurons may double the
complexity [I have actually found situations that comes a point when it may
more than double the complexity, going from a 1000 to 1001 may cause
complexity to be multiplied by a billion times.] So use of never here is
appropriate. And if you also want to understand why, in spite of the trumpeted
“advances” in sequencing the DNA, we are largely unable to get information
except in small isolated pockets of some diseases.
Understanding the genetic make-up of a unit will never allow us to
understand the behavior of the unit itself.
A reminder that what I am writing here isn’t an opinion. It is a straightforward
mathematical property.
I cannot resist this:
Much of the local research in experimental biology, in spite of its
seemingly “scientific” and evidentiary attributes fail a simple test of
mathematical rigor.
This means we need to be careful of what conclusions we can and cannot make
about what we see, no matter how locally robust it seems. It is impossible,
because of the curse of dimensionality, to produce information about a complex
system from the reduction of conventional experimental methods in science.
Impossible.
 My colleague Bar Yam has applied the failure of mean-field to evolutionary
theory of the selfish-gene narrative trumpeted by such aggressive journalists as
Richard Dawkins and other naive big egos with more mastery of English than
probability theory. [Explain Bar Yam’s problem of absence of spatial averaging
and connect to nonlinearities.]
